In the last video, I introduced you
to the idea of using a single catch block to handle
more than one type of exception.
In this video, we'll look closer at this feature
because not all exceptions can be
caught in the same catch block.
All right, so we need to create a new class
in our exceptions project called CatchExamples.
(keyboard clicking)
All right, so this code consists
of two checked custom exceptions.
You see CustomThrowable, which extends Throwable,
and CustomException, which extends Exception.
So moving on down to the CatchExamples class, you see
it's got a main method, but also, we'll come back to that.
We've got this testError method as well.
That one simply throws an IOException
and more on that later.
But back to the main method, you can see it's got four
try catch blocks to see each of the three generic classes,
Throwable and it's direct children,
exception, as well as error.
And each of the tri-clauses is empty again,
as you can see there.
We're also catching RuntimeException.
All right, so let's run this.
Okay, and now output at this stage.
So you can wrap any code or no code at all
in a try-catch clause as long as
the catch clause does not specify checked exception.
So let's test what happens if we catch checked
exceptions in the clauses above
So we're going to change our code now.
What I'm going to do is just replace the first two catches
there, the try, the catch Throwable,
and the try and the catch Exception.
We're going to replace those with our custom Throwable,
and custom Exception.
Replace the coding.
So both of our custom Exceptions fall into the category
of a checked exception and we're now
getting compile errors, as a result.
So, basically, we've now introduced a compile error,
just by wrapping a try-catch clause
with a checked exception around an empty statement.
It turns out that checked exceptions are two-way streets.
You cannot use them in a catch clause unless you carried
throws that type of exception.
So leave this code as is, for now,
so we're going to come back to it shortly.
What we're going to do is add
some more code into the source file.
I've got two classes, and we go up and paste
it just before our public class CatchExamples.
Then we go to SuperClass with one method that throws
our CustomException.
And we got sub-class, which extends SuperClass
that caused the above method in it's own method,
but wraps that in a try-catch block
and does not propagate it.
All right, the next thing we need to do is
add some code to the tri-block that has
the catch clause for CustomException.
So I'm going to replace what we've got there
with this new code.
And I think by doing that, I've fixed the compile error
that we had for the catch clause here, and you can see
we're calling the SuperClass code there,
which is obviously the methodSuperClass on line 23.
But what happens if we now try
and call our methodSubClass method?
Come back down and do that.
Change SuperClass to SubClass,
(keyboard clicking)
and we're back to having a compile error again.
So we see that, even though our subclass
is executing a method, which will come back
and bring it up on the screen, methodSubClass there.
It's executing a method that throws
a CustomException, the compile is not satisfied.
The CustomException is not propagated
from the SubClass method and therefore,
the catch block is not only unnecessary,
but considered an error.
What I'm going to do now is change all our try-catches here.
And we're now left with code very similar
to what we saw in the previous video.
This catch clause will catch either
a CustomException or a RuntimeException.
So let's just add Throwable to the mix as well.
We're adding it to the catch declaration clause.
So come over here.
Plot character Throwable.
You can see that by doing that,
the compiler doesn't like this code.
So why not?
Well you can't specify multiple exceptions
in a single catch clause that are considered
derivatives of another.
They must be disjoined.
If we look at the code there, they're both CustomException
and RuntimeException are derivatives
of Throwable, so the compiler disallows this declaration.
So we're going to replace Throwable now with IOException.
(keyboard clicking)
And we've replaced one compiler error with another
but this is one that we're familiar with if you look at it.
The code in the try-catch block
does not throw an IOException, which is,
of course, a checked exception.
So, let's actually add that.
We'll make use of our testError method, ce.testError.
That removes the error as you can see there.
And that's because our testError method
does throw an IOException.
Now we want to do something with the Exception e
pass to the catch clause by reassigning an object
to be of type CustomException.
Let's have a go at doing that.
It'll be in the catch clause.
As you can see, we've got yet another compile error.
I'll hover over that.
Cannot assign a value to final variable e.
Using a catch clause with multiple declared exceptions
comes with another limitation.
The parameter of the catch clause is implicitly final
and you cannot assign it to another value,
as we're attempting to do here in our catch clause.
So let's change the code to a throw
a RuntimeException instead.
(keyboard clicking)
This lets our code compile, if we run it.
Should work, although we won't see any output.
And there it is.
All right, so let's just tweak this a bit more.
The exam might test you on many of these nuances
which you may not be familiar with.
So we're gonna change the try-catch block here now.
And I'm just gonna replace the entire try-catch here.
(keyboard clicking)
So you can see what I've done is I've added
the ArithmeticException catch block in addition
to our multiple catch block.
And I've put that before the other
because you need to go to most specific to least specific.
If we hadn't done that, we would have received
a compiler error on the RuntimeException
in the multiple declaration.
And we're reassigning e, as you can see,
to a new ArithmeticException that is throwing it.
In a single exception catch clause, this is permitted.
So this code compiles with no errors.
I run it, we'll still get no output.
You probably figured out that ArithmeticException
is an unchecked exception since nothing
in the try clause throws this type of exception.
All right, so let's end the video here.
In the next video, we'll actually
start having a look at what happens
if we throw an exception in a finding clause
then we'll move on to looking at exceptions in initializers.
See you in the next video.